>>JACKIE FAHERTY: Is everybody excited?
I’m just going to start with that.
That’s good, because I can guarantee you
have never seen the Milky Way like you’re
about to see it tonight.
And it’s in part—that was a scream, I
like it.
Whatever this energy is, I’m going to work
with it.
What you’re going to see is rendering of
data that we do here at the American Museum
of Natural History.
And I’m so excited to show it to you because—I
mean, you guys are going to be some of the
first people to see data in this way, rendered
in this kind of way because you are here in
this place at the American Museum of Natural
History where we have some of the best data
visualization tools.
All right, so.
To start, I want to set the landscape for
you.
The landscape of astronomy.
This is a picture of the nighttime sky, it’s
about the best kind of nighttime sky anybody
on this Earth could hope to see.
This is a picture of the nighttime sky.
I was actually inside of one of those telescopes
when this picture was taken.
This is a picture taken from the Las Campanas
Observatory, which is in northern Chile.
And you’re seeing a fairly realistic, just
a little bit heightened, beautified image,
of what the nighttime sky should really look
like.
This is actually a very special picture.
This was actually on my birthday a couple
of years ago.
The photographer, Yuri Beletsky, took it for
me while I was observing.
Notice there’s this red dot on the upper
right-hand side, I don’t know if you guys
can notice that.
It was a total lunar eclipse this night.
So, actually—yeah, I like this.
You guys, very nice, very nice, you’re into
it.
On the left-hand side you’re seeing the
large and small Magellanic Clouds.
You can tell it’s the southern hemisphere
if you’re seeing those two satellite galaxies
of the Milky Way.
And this picture, to me, I’ve got a giant
version of this up in my office.
It’s one of my favorite pictures taken.
And it is a gorgeous view.
This is the view of the nighttime sky and
so when I ask all of you what you think of
when you think of the cosmos, you probably
think of the nighttime sky.
And you’d probably want to think of the
nighttime sky that I’ve got pictured for
you here.
However, and this is a beautiful image, you’re
missing some critical information here.
The critical information that humans are just
not capable of detecting is how far away all
this stuff is.
Your eyes can’t tell that.
You can’t tell that those two galaxies are
galaxies.
That they’re not inside of the Milky Way
that we live in.
You can’t tell that.
You can’t tell what in this picture is the
closest star to you.
You can’t see that.
You actually need something else.
You need science, which is real, not that
fake news, it’s real news.
Well, with the applause on that.
Science will give you answers to things like,
how far away is a star?
And we’ve figured that out.
The other thing that you don’t get from
this image, while magical and beautiful, is
you can’t see motion in this image.
All of these stars, everything that’s in
this picture right now, this snapshot taken
on a gorgeous night during a total lunar eclipse
in Chile, is moving.
But you’re not seeing it here.
And what I get to show you tonight, through
the magic of data visualization tools and
the magic of science, but it’s not magic,
‘cause it’s science, is—I’m going
to show you how stars move.
I’m going to take time and I’m going to
turn it on for you.
And I’m going to show you how we can learn
a tremendous amount about our galaxy by looking
at how far away stars are and how they move.
So, I’ve got several movies that will take
us through that.
And I want to thank a couple of things—this
talk was made possible by a couple of things.
Number one, and the reason why I can do this
tonight, and I’m sure many of you actually
don’t know this because it didn’t get
the kind of press I think it should have.
That’s a satellite called Gaia.
Gaia was launched several years ago.
And on April 25th of this year, the entire
perception of the Milky Way was changed.
The entire perception of astronomy was changed
on April 25th of this year.
The foundation of astrophysics—the foundation
of everything you know about the cosmos—you
need to know how far away something is.
You need to know how far away a star is.
It’s the foundation of stellar astrophysics.
It’s the foundation of cosmology, it’s
the foundation of everything.
And everything we knew until April 25th, 2018
of this year, was based on a prior mission—it’s
one of the trivia questions, I don’t know
if anybody got it right—a mission called
Hipparcos.
There were 120,000 stars that Hipparcos had
measured distances from.
And then we extrapolated on that and got a
ton of new information.
Gaia came out on April 25th and released 1.7
billion parallaxes—distances to stars and
motion.
A hundred and twenty-thousand is what modern
astrophysics was based upon.
One-point-seven billion is what we got on
April 25th.
So that’s a big difference.
You can applaud Gaia, because it is an amazing
mission.
So, what I’m going to do for you is I’m
taking subsets of that Gaia data, and anytime
you want to see Gaia, come to something we
do upstairs in the dome.
I can fly you through 900 million stars.
No one on this planet has seen that unless
you’ve seen it here, just FYI.
The other thing, I’m using three pieces
of software throughout.
You’ll note, I’ll have a little note on
the bottom of my screen during the movie so
you can see which piece of software I’m
using.
Some of this we develop here.
Some of the movies you’ll see that it’s
me rendering them as I work through the science.
But I’m going to take the Gaia dataset,
I’m going to break it down into subsets,
and I’m going to explain to you how science
has moved forward using this amazing dataset
with data visualization tools.
So, I’m going to start with—I just showed
you the Milky Way.
And there’s—this is going to be a movie
that I made using Partiview software, an open
source piece of software.
And this is a subset—so, 1.7 billion stars
breaks a laptop.
So.
Just in case you were wondering, it’s very
hard to render that on your laptop.
So I’m going to show you subsets.
This is going to be a couple hundred thousand
stars.
A couple hundred thousand.
It’s like me rolling my eyes at that—that’s
amazing.
A couple hundred thousand stars.
I’m going to run through this.
So, this, now, is—this is not an image.
These are all dots.
These are all stars for which we’ve measured
the positions.
And already you can see, before I start the
movie, it looks like the Milky Way already.
I call this pointillism.
It’s pointillism of the Milky Way galaxy.
No one has ever been able to do this before.
I’m going to turn this on and you’re going
to see—this is my flying around in the data.
It’s a screenshot of me, using the software.
And so the best part of this now is I can
fly out.
I can actually move outside of the data.
This is a specific subset of data.
These are the hottest stars.
So we never knew exactly how far away they
were because no one could actually measure
their distances before, we didn’t actually
have a satellite that could do it.
You can see I’m rendering this, I’m moving
out.
So these are what are called the O and the
B stars that live hard, die fast.
There’s like a—I mean, that’s literally
what happens.
They are very big and they die in just a couple
million years.
So they never move outside the plane of the
Milky Way.
So, as I fly out, the dots that I turned on
there is the locations of what’s called
“star formation regions.”
Most people know Orion, right?
Everybody loves Orion.
Orion is the closest star-forming region to
the Earth.
And so I pulled out, part of why I think this
phenomenal—notice these streaks.
I kind of call them fingers of God.
And those are marking for you clumps.
These are where star-forming regions are located.
And part of—I’m going to run it again—and
as you fall out, what you’ll see is, okay,
we all know, that image of the galaxy you
just saw, we didn’t take that picture.
Voyager is kind of the farthest thing we ever
sent and it’s barely left the solar system.
So we’ve never taken a picture of the galaxy.
But what we’re able to do in this map, and
as I fly out here the second time, what you’ll
see is the locations of those star-forming
regions.
Those locations of these hot, O and B stars
are telling you the shape of the Milky Way
galaxy.
It’s been heavily debated what the shape
of the Milky Way galaxy is.
Does it have spiral arms?
I mean, we think so, we’re in a spiral galaxy.
What do those spiral arms look like?
You can now use these stars as a map to try
and get to that structure.
And part of why at this point in the video
that I’m sort of zooming around, and you’ll
see I turn on this image of the galaxy and
turn it off.
As you blink on and blink off, what you’re
seeing is gaps.
And non-gaps.
Which look like you’re basically getting
the structure of the spiral galaxy out from
this very simple thing of just mapping the
hottest stars in the galaxy.
Okay, next video I’m going to show you,
and this is my favorite one—you’re not
supposed to have favorites, but I have favorites.
So, this is my favorite one.
This is what I call the solar neighborhood
flybys.
This is something that I’ve wanted to do,
just something I’ve always wanted to do.
If you know how stars are moving and you know
how far away they are, you can look at their
trajectories.
We are stuck in this static view, like I mentioned,
of what the galaxy looks like right now, what
the nearby stars look like right now.
But once Gaia showed up with all of these
motions and distances, we can turn time on
and you can see—are these the stars that
have always been the closest stars to us?
Did we ever have a flyby?
Did another star come sweeping through our
solar system and knock a bunch of stuff around?
Kicking comets and asteroids from the Kuyper
Belt and the Ort Cloud, the asteroid belt,
in towards the inner solar system.
Well, we can turn time on on this video.
So this is a cartoon version of the sun.
This is rendered with software we have here
called Open Space.
So, again, in the corner here, it’s telling
you what software I’m rendering this with.
And these are all stars that you cannot see
with your eye.
Because your eye can’t really detect anything
but the brightest stars.
And so I’m going to turn time on right now
and it’s going to go over a couple of million
years.
So you’re going to watch your future.
And don’t be scared, but kind of be scared.
This is a lot of stuff going on here.
So, what you’re seeing—again, don’t
be scared, but be scared—that all of the
stars around you are moving.
Everything is moving.
And you don’t know, though—are they moving
toward you?
Are they moving away from you?
What this video is showing is mostly—sorry—mostly
the stars motion through the galaxy.
You’re watching the stars have their trajectory
in the plane of the galaxy.
But notice some of them are flying closer
than others.
And what was an immediate thing that came
out of this—this was actually something
that we knew from Hipparcos, but we know it
so much better now, is that in—this another
little movie that I’ll show you close in—in
1.2 million years, there’s a star called
Gliese 710.
It’s about 60% the mass of the sun.
And it’s going to come within the Ort Cloud,
which is that cloud of debris that I’m flying
you towards right now.
You can see the star right there.
You can come in past the glare of the sun,
past the Kuyper Belt into the Earth.
And in 1.2 million years, look out.
Who knows if we’ll still be around.
But if are, Gliese 710 is doing a flyby.
And, when it does, it looks like it’ll kick
around a bunch of stuff in the Ort Cloud.
When it does that, it sends stuff into the
inner solar system.
Now, okay, I’m not trying to scare you.
But that is an absolutely important of understanding
solar systems, to know what is the dynamic
nature of how things move.
And just one other thing on this, too.
I’m going to run this again.
How many people have heard of Oumuamua?
Anybody hear of Oumuamua?
Couple of shouts, one or two.
Oumuamua is this object that was a recent
visitor.
So I’m just going to turn this on to continually
scare you.
Oumuamua is this piece of debris, it looks
like, that came from a different solar system.
It flew through our solar system very recently.
It was discovered a year ago.
And we caught it, it’s on what’s called
a hyperbolic orbit, which means it’s not
bound to our own sun.
Flew right out.
Now, using the data like this, astronomers,
it was just last week, used this exact thing
that I’m showing you to trace back where
Oumuamua might have come from.
Now, we’re not sure that it’s right.
I mean, that’s also the other aspect of
this.
We’re not positive we got all the velocities
and the positions correct.
But never before in time have we been able
to even take the step towards this.
Where you could trace back the motion of an
object that came from a completely different
solar system and try and find its host, to
find where it came from.
An ejected piece of garbage from some other
star that just passed through here.
And we studied it.
And now we used this kind of thing to trace
back where it might have come from.
So, that should excite you.
That is the science on the horizon of what
we’re able to do in the nearby solar neighborhood.
Another thing that we can do with this gigantic
dataset—this is something that I worked
on heavily—is look for objects that move
together.
Kind of looking for family members of stars.
Until you know how far away they are and how
they move, you cannot know if they’re moving
with each other or not.
So what this movie is rendering for you, this
is a catalog of about 10,000 stars that I’m
isolating for you.
They’re very near to the sun.
And I’m going to turn time on here and every
one of these objects is moving with something
else.
So you’re going to watch.
This is over millions and millions of years.
So the beauty of this is that you will never
get to see this, because we don’t live long
enough.
But I can simulate it for you.
And so now, as you watch these dots, notice
how they’re moving in clumps.
So you’ve caught a chunk of things over
here on the far left-hand side.
Everybody’s got a partner here.
And this, this is how you figure out where
do stars come from?
How do stars evolve?
How do they end up interacting with each other?
Do they stay together?
Are these clumps of just four and five stars—because
some of these are clumps of four and five
stars that we’ve only recently discovered—are
they the last bits of core of a giant region
of stars that had formed together millions
of years ago?
Billions of years ago?
This is the kind of stuff we get to figure
out now.
It’s like forensic evidence that we didn’t
have before and all of a sudden we have access
to.
This is another one.
This is now a catalogue, that was 10,000 stars
that I was focused on because they were all
co-moving with each other.
This now is a collection of stars that are
all young.
So, we know that they’re young.
All of these show the telltale signatures
of an object that is a young object.
And so I’m going to pull out a little bit
and you’re going to see, there’s about
10,000 stars in here.
And this I work on non-stop, because the young
stars near the sun are also where you would
look for the baby solar systems, for the newly-forming
planets, for the areas where you’re going
to get a glimpse of maybe what our solar system
looked like back when it was just a little
baby.
And as you pull out here, this is where it
gets intense, because you’re seeing what’s
called the Centaurus-Lupus Super Complex.
And as I’m saying that I’m forgetting
the full jargon for it.
But this is a gigantic complex of young stars
near the sun.
And I’m going to turn time on in the last
moment and you’ll watch that these objects—so
these are the labels of some of them.
There’s Coma Berenices, there’s Pleiades
8.
There’s the Hades and the Pleiades, which
many of you might recognize because you’ve
seen it in the sky.
And now time is turned on and you’re seeing
how these things move.
So they move together.
But do they move together forever?
That last video I showed you might be the
last remnants, the cores of these things which,
at this point, we know are co-moving with
each other.
They’re all young stars and this, this is
where the solar systems are forming.
This is where astronomers look.
And Gaia just gave us this unprecedented look
at where they came from, because you can actually
run time backwards and forwards and see how
they interact with each other.
One other thing that Gaia doesn’t do that
great of a job with, yet I was still able
to pull out info and I have to say this because
this is my passion and my science, which is
brown dwarfs.
This is a video that’s showing you—even
there’s stuff that you can’t even see
with your eyes in the Milky Way, yet it’s
right there, so brown dwarfs are these objects
in-between stars and planets that are everywhere.
And I just wanted to promote for you as well
that mapping the Milky Way and mapping the
solar neighborhood is something that we’re
still doing today.
The third and fourth closest—I said “systems,”
but it really means stars, star systems to
the sun were only discovered in 2013 and 2014.
Just imagine discovering an object that’s
sitting there right outside—it’s like
turning over in bed and somebody’s there.
And you’re, like, when you’d get there?
Like, how did that happen?
But that’s still happening.
They’re really cold, so it’s also like
you can hide out because they’re cold.
And I run a citizens science project called
Backyard Worlds, Backyardworlds.org, if you’re
interested.
Go to the website.
Help discover new worlds.
Gaia isn’t as good with these because they’re
a bit too faint.
What now I’m going to reflect on exoplanets.
And this is a movie that we’ve rendered
here using Uniview software to give you a
highlight of the current view of planets around
other stars.
So this is a flight off of the surface of
the Earth into the nearby solar neighborhood,
out of the glare of the solar system.
And what you’re going to see is, as we move
out of our solar system, a bunch of stars
are going to come up that we’ve only discovered
since basically the year 1995.
But since 1995, we’ve been discovering exoplanets.
And now all of the blue circles are showing
you were stars near the sun have been found
to have an exoplanet around them.
The majority of these that you’re seeing,
you can see that they’re all around you.
And, as we pull out what you’re going to
see is a special catalogue of objects.
It’s going to be color-coded in yellow and
it’s called the Kepler Planetary Objects.
Kepler was this spacecraft launched many years
ago.
So here comes Kepler into this field of view.
Notice the blue circles here which are marking
for you the location of planets around stars.
It’s very close to the sun.
And that’s because a lot of those, we’re
just looking at the brightest stars using
a technique called the radio velocity method.
Kepler used what’s called the transiting
method, which means you stared at a field
of view and you watched and waited for a planet
to cross in front of the star from your point
of view.
And so this is going to fly outside of the
Milky Way.
Again, we didn’t take this picture of the
Milky Way because we’ve only gone as far
as maybe outside the solar system.
So this is an image of another galaxy that
we think looks like our own.
And this should both absolutely amaze you
and also make you wonder, oh, my goodness,
there’s a lot more to the galaxy for us
to try and figure out.
So these objects we pull out, you can see
where Kepler was.
This was our rendered view of it prior to
Gaia.
I’m going to show you the view from Gaia
and part of that is Kepler redefined how we
knew about exoplanets.
Like I said, those exoplanets that you saw
with the blue circles, those were fairly close
by.
And, while we had a lot of them, we didn’t
quite have them the way that we do with Kepler.
You can see that, you can go way further out.
Way towards the edge of what you can do in
the galaxy.
And there are now thousands of exoplanets
that have been discovered via Kepler.
This is showing it to you now all mapped properly
with their distances from Gaia.
And I’m going to turn time on in just a
minute and what you’re going to see it Kepler
break apart.
So this is the Kepler field of view.
This is the view that you would have gotten
from Earth, from the detectors.
And what you want to look for is, once you
have them all mapped out, you want to be able
to see where they’re going and where they
came from.
So, as we’re close in, you’ll see the
detector field of view comes in and we turn
time on.
And you’re going to watch where these stars
came from and where they’re going.
That kind of broke the Internet when we put
this on Twitter the day after Gaia came out.
So you’re watching where those stars came—where
are they going?
Who are they moving with?
These are all—this is the history of these
exoplanets.
And this final thing that I’m gong to show
you is the thing that we can now with Gaia,
matching it with very complicated missions
that now color-code all of these objects by
their chemistry.
So you can take very complicated surveys that
go and measure the abundances of different
molecules and you can actually see, you can
see—this is showing you in color-coded—how
much iron you’re getting out of stars.
How much iron you were getting in Kepler and
then lots of other fields of view.
And notice there’s the green and then it
gradients out to the blue.
Blue means low metallicity.
It means that there’s not a lot of metal
in that.
That’s a signature of older stars, which
is what you see when you get outside of the
galaxy.
One more view of that from this perspective.
And, by the way, the reason why this looks
so funny, with these footprints, these singular
footprints, is because that’s the view that
we had from the telescope, when you looked
up and you took an image of the sky.
It’s in two dimensions and, through the
magic of data visualization, we can actually
fly you through those datasets with Gaia Parallaxes
and beyond.
All right.
So that’s your quick tour of all of the
exciting aspects.
I have probably a hundred more movies I could
show you, but I’m out of time on the movies,
so I’m going to leave you with this takeaway:
The Milky Way galaxy, via Gaia, via many surveys
on top of Gaia, is being mapped like never
before.
And this data is revealing just the intricate
details of where stars come from and where
they’re going.
And, if you’re interested in playing with
the data, this is not just for astronomers.
This is for the public.
This is for everybody.
This is for the kids.
You guys are right here, I’m pointing at
you.
This is for everybody to play with.
So, download our software.
Download the data.
Play with it.
It’s 1.7 billion stars, that’s too many
for the astronomers.
There’s not enough astronomers for all of
the data.
So please consider this your invitation to
the party of mapping the galaxy.